[20512] Topic Keys Documentation (#183)
eProsima/vulcanexus: docs/rst/tutorials/core/deployment/keys/filtered_topic_keys.rst

.. include:: ../../../../exports/alias.include

.. _filtered_topic_keys_tutorial:

Topic Instances Subscription Filtering Tutorial
===============================================

This tutorial aims to demonstrate how to receive data only from certain topic instances by combining the use of topic keys and topic content filtering.

.. contents::
    :depth: 2
    :local:
    :backlinks: none

Background
----------

In Vulcanexus, topics are a mean for representing the state of an object.

> :ref:`topic_keys` refer to topics where each data sample can update specific parts of the entire object state described by the topic (known as *instance* or *topic instance*).

Reviewer: Same as before

> Keyed topics allow the user to reduce the number of required resources (topics, along with its associated publisher and subscriber) by multiplexing data into a single one.

Reviewer: Same as before

Please, refer to the documented section on :ref:`topic_keys` for a more detailed explanation.

> The `Content Filter Topic <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/topic/contentFilteredTopic/contentFilteredTopic.html>`_ facilitates efficient data distribution by allowing the publications (writer-side) or subscription (reader-side) to specify criteria for the types of data they wish to receive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Content Filter Topic <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/topic/contentFilteredTopic/contentFilteredTopic.html>`_ facilitates efficient data distribution by allowing the publications (writer-side) or subscription (reader-side) to specify criteria for the types of data they wish to receive.
```
```suggestion
The `Content Filter Topic <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/topic/contentFilteredTopic/contentFilteredTopic.html>`_ facilitates efficient data distribution by allowing the subscription (reader-side) to specify criteria for the types of data they wish to receive.
```

> By defining this criteria, irrelevant data can be filtered out and focus only on the information that is relevant to their needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By defining this criteria, irrelevant data can be filtered out and applications can focus only on the information that is relevant to their needs.
```

Author: I think this one was applied

> This functionality not only reduces the amount of data transmitted over the network but also minimizes processing overhead on the publishing or receiving end, leading to improved system performance and scalability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This functionality not only reduces the amount of data transmitted over the network but also minimizes processing overhead on the receiving end, leading to improved system performance and scalability.
```

When combined with topic instances, the benefits of the Content Filter are further enhanced.
By associating specific filter criteria with each topic instance, it is possible fine-tune the data selection process and tailor it to their precise requirements.

> This granular level of filtering enables the applications to optimally manage data while ensuring that they exchange only the information that is pertinent to their individual use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This granular level of filtering enables applications to optimally manage data while ensuring that they exchange only the information that is pertinent to their individual use cases.
```

//TODO: Add video

Prerequisites
-------------

* It is highly recommended to have completed the :ref:`topic_keys_tutorial`.
* An up-to-date (latest) Vulcanexus installation using one of the following installation methods:

  * :ref:`linux_binary_installation`
  * :ref:`linux_source_installation`
  * :ref:`docker_installation`

Preparing the demo package
--------------------------

Lets start by setting up the Vulcanexus environment.
For this, there are two possible options:

#.  Running the Vulcanexus Docker image.

    Run the Vulcanexus Docker image with:

    .. code-block:: bash

        docker run -it --rm ubuntu-vulcanexus:{DISTRO}-desktop

    Then, within the container, source the Vulcanexus installation with:

    .. code-block:: bash

            source /opt/vulcanexus/{DISTRO}/setup.bash

#.  Running the tutorial on the local host. For this second option,

>     it is necessary to have installed the ``vucanexus-iron-base`` package,
>     since this is the one that includes all the simulation tools, demos and tutorials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    it is necessary to have the ``vucanexus-iron-base`` package installed.
```

    wget -O src/filtered_keyed_sensor.cpp https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/{DISTRO}/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/keys/demo_keys_filtering_cpp/src/filtered_keyed_sensor.cpp
    wget -O src/filtered_keyed_controller.cpp https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/{DISTRO}/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/keys/demo_keys_filtering_cpp/src/filtered_keyed_controller.cpp
    wget -O launch/keyed_sensors_launch.py https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/{DISTRO}/docs/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/keys/demo_keys_filtering_cpp/launch/keyed_sensors_launch.py

The resulting directory structure should be:

.. code-block::

    ~/vulcanexus_ws
     ├──src
        ├── demo_keys_filtering_cpp
            ├── CMakeLists.txt
            ├── README.md
            ├── launch
            │   └── keyed_sensors_launch.py
            ├── msg
            │   └── KeyedSensorDataMsg.idl
            ├── package.xml
            └── src
                ├── filtered_keyed_controller.cpp
                └── filtered_keyed_sensor.cpp

A brief analysis on the provided files is explained below:

> * *demo_keys_filtering_cpp* : This directory likely contains the main source code and configuration files for the demonstration.

Reviewer: Likely? May it not contain it? 🤣

Author: Copilot...

* ``CMakeLists.txt``: This file is used with CMake to specify build configurations and dependencies.

> * ``README.md``: This is likely a markdown file providing instructions or information about the demonstration.

Reviewer: Likely?

* *launch*: This directory probably contains launch configuration files for launching ROS nodes.
  * ``keyed_sensors_launch.py``: This Python script is likely used to launch the demonstration nodes.
* *msg*: This directory contains message definition files.
  * KeyedSensorDataMsg.idl: This is likely an IDL (Interface Definition Language) file defining the message structure for keyed sensor data.
* ``package.xml``: This is an XML file containing metadata about the ROS package.
* *src*: This directory contains the source code files for the demonstration.
  * ``filtered_keyed_controller.cpp``: This is likely the source code for a controller node that filters keyed sensor data in reception.

>   * ``filtered_keyed_sensor.cpp``: This is likely the source code for a sensor node that publishes keyed sensor data.

Reviewer: Please re-read this

> 

Reviewer: I think we also need a couple of snippets for the most relevant bits here

Building the demo package
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Once the environment has been setup and the demo package sources are available, we are ready to build the workspace.

Reviewer: Avoid use of "we"

Get into the root of the workspace and build it with the following commands:

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/{DISTRO}/setup.bash
    cd ~/vulcanexus_ws
    colcon build

Running the demo
----------------

In the demo, different sensors are publishing data

> Run the demo by executing the following commands in separate terminals:

Reviewer: I think we need a bit more explanation than this. Again a small diagram would be lovely

.. note::

    If a docker deployment was preferred, it would be necessary to attach the other two terminals to
    the running docker container before executing the above commands.
    This can be done by running ``docker exec -it <container_name> /bin/bash``.

.. tabs::

    .. tab:: Shell 1 (Sensors)

        .. code-block:: bash

            source ~/vulcanexus_ws/install/setup.bash
            ros2 launch demo_keys_filtering_cpp keyed_sensors_launch.py

    .. tab:: Shell 2 (Controller)

        .. code-block:: bash

            source ~/vulcanexus_ws/install/setup.bash
            ros2 run demo_keys_filtering_cpp filtered_keyed_controller

> The resulting output should be similar to the following, in which the controller node is receiving data from the sensors and filtering it based on the sensor_id (topic instances, sensors 2 to 4).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting output should be similar to the following, in which the controller node is only receiving data from the specified sensors, i.e. sensors which sensor_id is in the range [2, 4].
```

In addition, only when the measurement is greater than 60, the controller node will receive data.

> That is what it is specified in the filter expression ``sensor_id >= 2 AND sensor_id <= 4``:

Reviewer: Missing the threshold part here
```suggestion
That is specified in the filter expression ``sensor_id >= 2 AND sensor_id <= 4``:
```

Author: Totally true

.. raw:: html

    <video width=100% height=auto autoplay loop controls muted>
        <source src="../../../../../_static/resources/tutorials/core/deployment/keys/filtered_keyed_topic.mp4">
        Your browser does not support the video tag.
    </video>

> Even in a late-joining scenario, the controller node will receive the latest data of the sensors that meet the filter criteria at the moment it joins the application, which could be crucial depending on the type of the real application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even in a late-joining scenario, the controller node will receive the latest data of the sensors that meet the filtering criteria at the moment it joins the application, which could be crucial depending on the type of the real application.
```

Overall, the combination of topic instances with a content filter topic offers significant benefits in terms of data efficiency, scalability, adaptability and resource optimization.
By leveraging these capabilities, *Vulcanexus* applications can efficiently manage and distribute data in complex distributed environments.
These and further benefits can be explored in :ref:`benefits_of_topic_keys`.

> 

Reviewer: Link the ROS 2 CFT tutorial here somewhere

        Your browser does not support the video tag.
    </video>

Even in a late-joining scenario, the controller node will receive the latest data of the sensors that meet the filtering criteria at the moment it joins the application, which could be crucial depending on the type of the real application.

Overall, the combination of topic instances with a content filter topic offers significant benefits in terms of data efficiency, scalability, adaptability and resource optimization.
By leveraging these capabilities, *Vulcanexus* applications can efficiently manage and distribute data in complex distributed environments.
These and further benefits can be explored in :ref:`benefits_of_topic_keys`.

> Also, for additional materials regarding the topic content filter, please refer to the :doc:`Content Filtering Subscription Tutorial <../../../../../ros2_documentation/source/Tutorials/Demos/Content-Filtering-Subscription>`.

Author: https://github.com/eProsima/ros2_documentation/pull/25
